The Last of the Flock by William Wordsworth
Read by Tim McMullen for the BBC
In distant countries I have been,
And yet I have not often seen a healthy man,
A man full grown, weep in the public roads alone.
But such a one, on English ground,
And in the broad highway I met,
Along the broad highway he came,
His cheeks with tears were wet,
Sturdy he seemed, though he was sad,
And in his arms a lamb he had.
He saw me and he turned aside,
As if he wished himself to hide,
Then with his coat he made a say,
To wipe those briny tears away.
I followed him and said,
My friend, what ails you?
Wherefore weep you so?
Shame on me, sir, this lusty lamb,
He makes my tears to flow.
Today I fetched him from the rock,
He is the last of all my flock.
When I was young, a single man,
And after youthful follies ran,
Though little given to care and thought,
Yet so it was, a yew I bought,
And other sheep from her I raised,
As healthy sheep as yew might see.
And then I married, and was rich as I could wish to be.
Of sheep I numbered a full score,
And every year increased my store,
Year after year my stock it grew,
And from this one, this single yew,
Full fifty comely sheep I raised,
As sweet a flock as ever grazed,
Upon the mountain they did feed,
They throve, and we at home did thrive,
This lusty lamb of all my store,
Is all that is alive.
And now I care not if we die,
And perish all of poverty.
Ten children, sir, had I to feed,
Hard labor in a time of need,
My pride was tamed,
And in our grief I of the perish asked relief.
They said I was a wealthy man,
My sheep upon the mountain fed,
And it was fit that thence I took
Whereof to buy us bread.
Do this, how can we give to you, they cried,
What to the poor is due.
I sold a sheep, as they had said,
And bought my little children bread,
And they were healthy with their food.
For me, it never did me good,
A woeful time it was for me
To see the end of all my gains,
The pretty flock which I had reared
With all my care and pains,
To see it melt like snow away.
For me, it was a woeful day.
Another still, and still another,
A little lamb, and then its mother,
It was a vein that never stopped,
Like blood drops from my heart they dropped,
Till thirty were not left alive.
They dwindled, dwindled one by one,
And I may say that many a time
I wished they all were gone.
They dwindled one by one away.
For me, it was a woeful day.
To wicked deeds I was inclined,
And wicked fancies crossed my mind,
And every man I chanced to see,
I thought he knew some ill of me.
No peace, no comfort could I find,
No ease, with indoors or without.
And crazily and wearily I went my work about,
Of times I thought to run away.
For me, it was a woeful day.
Sir, it was a precious flock to me,
As dear as my own children be,
For daily with my growing store
I loved my children more and more.
Alas, it was an evil time.
God cursed me in my sore distress.
I prayed, yet every day I thought
I loved my children less,
And every week and every day my flock,
It seemed to melt away.
They dwindled, sir, sad sight to see,
From ten to five, from five to three,
A lamb, a weather, and a yew,
And then at last from three to two.
And of my fifty yesterday I had but only one,
And here it lies upon my arm.
Alas, and I have none.
Today I fetched it from the rock.
It is the last of all my flock.